so can you starve the tumor cell of
their fermentable fuels and kill them
and the answer is absolutely it's an
elegant beautiful system and when it's
done right it you can't believe how well
it works problem is Sanjay nobody is
doing that
welcome to Target cancer podcast my name
is Dr Sanjay janeja I'm an oncologist
known as the UNC doc on social media and
today I'm very excited to have Dr Thomas
Seyfried who is basically a wizard when
it comes to metabolic stuff and what
does that mean all this stuff that you
hear about like are there amino acids we
can basically starve cancers with or
what does it do to have like a keto diet
and does that help he's got over 150 uh
Publications he's extremely respected in
the metabolic world and we're just so
excited to have you so thank you for
being here Dr zebri well thank you very
much for having me on your program here
of course so I'm just going to get
straight to it usually
um the first question I get on social
media where people really passionate
right and and caring about either the
themselves with their cancer or
especially with a loved one ask the
question can I starve my cancer and
especially with like limiting sugar and
things like that that is kind of true
and kind of not right we always have to
go back to uh energy without energy
nothing can survive or grow so you say
to yourself well
we we breathe air we exhale CO2 we
produce CO2 and water from the foods
that that we eat you and I are having a
conversation
uh we're talking obviously there's
energy going on somewhere in our brains
and the rest of our body
and that allows us to do what we do now
if you and I were to uh
uh take a cup of cyanide
and we would both drink it together
neither of us would have much energy we
would both fall and collapse right in
front of the screens let me put it
another way if you and I both had tumors
growing in our body
and we were both drinking the cyanide
together and someone would say whoa what
a catastrophe these two guys that think
they know what they're doing just killed
themselves but they had cancer so we're
going to take the tumor out we're going
to look at it and the tumor cells would
be fine the cyanide would not kill the
tumor cells so uh when you say whoa
what's going on how is it possible that
the the cyanide killed these folks but
it didn't kill their tumor and the
answer is the tumor doesn't use an uh
oxygen for energy it uses fermentation
for energy
so Warburg did those experiments years
ago given rats that had tumors Cyanide
and the rat died but not the tumor and
that and it was clear evidence that the
tumors are not using oxygen for their
for their survival
so what are they what are they living on
how are they growing and alive if if
they're not using oxygen and it turns
out that they use fermentation so that
fermentation is a form of energy that by
bypasses oxygen so that's interesting
they're fermenting huh well what are the
fuels that are driving their
fermentation metabolism what are they
using and it's glucose uh the the sugar
glucose and the amino acid glutamine and
those are the two fermentable fuels that
allow cancer cells to LA to uh to grow
so the answer to your question is yes
cancer cells live they and can you
starve them okay so if we know they're
fermenting and we know that they can't
live without fermentable fuels and you
know that there are only two fermentable
fuels that are keeping them alive then
you Target and take those two
fermentable fuels away and they die so
can you starve the tumor cell of their
fermentable fuels and kill them and the
answer is absolutely and then your
question is well if that's so simple how
come no one's doing it and the answer is
because everybody thinks cancer is a
genetic disease they're not thinking
about what's keeping the cells alive
right
so interesting so when you say you know
it's it this applies to really any kind
of neoplastic tumor or is it just for
some in particular I went through all
the major cancers I spent a lot of time
in our my eye science paper and I looked
at every one of the major cancers but
you have to go back and look at electron
microscopy and you have to look at
biochemistry and you have to ask what is
the the mitochondria number and function
and structure look normal or not and
every case not
a respiratory systems they're all like
deficient and all these kinds of things
so what I just described to you would be
common to all the major cancers that we
know of is it possible that the
fermentation process is something that
is physiologically adapted once you've
kind of broken a threshold of no longer
being able to meet the requirements of
proliferation and growth in a classic
traditional non neoplastic cancer cell
way as in the stuff that we are used to
blood flow and oxygen is it something
that possibly you know is is taking
place in the environment of injury which
is why they say okay now we need to
propagate a different mechanism or do
you think it was something that
originated like like you know early on
into the pathogenesis was that almost a
required tool to even permit it to
become into something that ends up being
neoplastic or cancerous yeah well that
goes back to the uh how you get how does
this process happen in the first place
what is what is responsible
for uh the dependency on fermentation
um because as Otto Warburg said you can
never get a cancer cell that cannot uh
transition from respiration to
fermentation and and the evidence for
that is we rarely if ever see
neoplastic cells in neurons of the brain
they just simply cannot sustain uh they
cannot replace oxidative phosphorylation
with fermentation you see it in glial
cells of course right those cells came
we don't see cancers of cardiac muscle
rarely of skeletal muscle because those
those kinds of cells cannot uh they they
can't they'll die without oxidation
oxidative phosphorylation oh so that's a
bad observation in of itself kind of
prompts the you know the thing like well
why is that the case and supports you
know exactly what you're saying what are
some of the things that if you do
deprive it of fermentation would uh kind
of take injury obviously we've just said
unlikely the central nervous neurons and
cardiac tissue but is there something
that may kind of take an insult that's
not cancerous in your body if you've
deprived those things oh sure uh if you
go and try to knock out glucose and
glutamine fermentation by itself uh yeah
you're going to harm the rest of the
body however what we do with the cancer
patients is we transition their whole
body over to a ketotic state ketosis all
the normal cells of the body brain cells
liver cells they all can burn fatty
acids or Ketone right once the patient
once the patient is in therapeutic
ketosis then you can lower blood sugars
down to very very extremely low levels I
mean 0.5 millimole 9 milligrams per
deciliter I mean you can push blood
sugars down to incredibly low levels
um but but the brain and the rest of the
cells are protected because they can
burn fatty acids and ketones and going
back to fermentation fatty acids and
Ketone bodies are non-fermentable they
cannot be fermented so they become
non-fuels for the tumor cell so
obviously the answer to your question is
yes you can damage the body if you just
simply Target glucose and glutamine
without first transitioning the body
over to ketones once you do that then
the rest of the body is totally
protected and the cancer cells become
marginalized and killed off without
harming the rest of the body and why is
it that they can't use like uh when you
go into ketosis why they are unable to
use those to be now and need a good
mitochondria to burn ketones and fatty
acids you need a good oxidative
phosphorylation system and the common
phenotype of all major cancers is
deficiency of oxidative phosphorylation
so it and from the structure uh uh in
evolutionary biology structure
determines function that's why when you
look at the electron microscope and you
see ghost mitochondria no cristae
dysmorphic mitochondria you know they're
not going to be able to generate energy
through oxidative phosphor
phosphorylation so you know they're
going to have to be dependent on
fermentation it's very simple yeah not
complicated we part in this Interruption
real quick if you're enjoying this
podcast or find it valuable for what we
discussed in the education and how
people see and think about cancer in
general we would very much appreciate a
like subscribe and especially a share so
we can bring that information as
maximally and broadly as possible thank
you so much for listening so this is
just you know me thinking out loud but
when we use these things called for the
for people listening like vegf
Inhibitors or uh you know endothelial or
vascular basically growth factors where
tumors are like ooh like especially the
kind of juicier tumors that want blood
flow like renal cell carcinomas and and
cholangio and liver like a lot of that
you know a lot of those lung even want
to be able to prove blood vessels does
that further inhibit the tumors you know
ability and do you use them concurrently
at all or does that how is why is that
why does that work in these cancers if
it doesn't work it doesn't work that's
that's why they threw out all the the
anti-angiogenic drugs even the pony
Ferrar who said who has developed one of
these says that this stuff doesn't work
cancer cell doesn't need all that stuff
and don't forget angiogenesis Downstream
effect of of damage to oxidative
phosphorylation so when the cell can't
can't respire uh hif1 Alpha which is a
powerful transcription Factor uh turns
on uh uh glycolysis and runs vascular
endothelial growth factor so all that
stuff is Downstream so uh you don't have
to that's why avastin and all these
crazy things that the people are using
they don't work they don't work because
the damn tumor cell doesn't need uh as
long as it has in the micro environment
the necessary fuels and that's why when
you give brain cancer to if I told it's
like it's like malpractice that treats
somebody with with avastin and what it
does is it forces the cells out into
this into the neural parenchyma you
can't see them on pet scans or or MRI
CAT scan or anything like this those Dam
cells can and they're also phagocytic so
you got to know that they can eat uh
engulf stuff from the micro environment
get glucose and glutamine from the micro
environment even if you if even if you
try to uh you know stop the blood
vessels and things like this none of
that stuff works man uh you got to
realize how do you know that we got 1600
over 1600 people a day dying and dying
from cancer so obviously all that stuff
is not working and it doesn't work
because it's not focused on this
essential process issue that we're
dealing with fermentation I mean they
don't they definitely don't like
necessarily cure cancers but at least
for renal cells I mean we really have
two groups that are seemingly more
immune sensitive and more angiogenic and
that's you know so we use a lot of the
tkis now uh you know in combination or
without with uh immune therapy in that
setting but you're correct I mean
eventually there's a statute of you know
uh exploration there where where it's no
longer usually affected so very
interesting and so that is a way that
it's almost like an agnostic treatment
tissue agnostic in the sense that we've
said before where what I'm hearing is it
doesn't matter what the origin or
histopathology to some degree is on
where it originated but really it's just
a matter of is it this neoplastic thing
that had to really know to exist without
being able to use its mitochondria
functionally and therefore wherever it
is wherever it originated it sounds like
you have a high you know degree of
success I I guess if that's the right
term just by putting yourself into that
state well I think you have to recognize
that um we we can we can use diets to
reduce glucose but we can't use diets to
reduce glutamine and glutamine is an
essential amino acid for the tumor cell
in fact they call it a non-essential
amino acid but really it's quite
essential for our immune system for our
gut health for the urea cycle I mean we
need glutamine and glutamine is abundant
it's the most abundant amino acid in our
body
so we have we have a situation here
where our normal cells of the immune
system need the same fuel use the same
fuel that the neoplastic tumor cell uses
so we have to that's why we develop the
the Press pulse strategy for managing
cancer you can press glucose down
consistently because you're transitioned
over to ketones so we we eliminate the
glucose issue but we pulse drug we use
drugs to pulse glutamine because if
we're too aggressive in targeting
glutamine we compromise our own immune
system and its ability to pick up the
dead cancer cells after you kill them
otherwise leading to infections and
other kinds of uh adverse effects so we
use small doses of glutamine targeting
drugs once the patient is in therapeutic
ketosis so we put them on just for a
short time dosage timing and scheduling
and then we pull them off and let the
immune system in the gut and everything
come back to a normalcy but you've
already slaughtered a significant number
of tumor cells and then the immune
system the our immune cells aren't
killed by the deprivation of glutamine
they're just stunned uh they're alive
but they're just like paralyzed
um uh but once you pull the the
glutamine drug back off our immune
system reactivates and goes in and picks
up the dead corpses and we have to have
a time period while this process is
taking place and of course when you add
the glutamine back or don't remove the
drug uh you will get the rescue of some
of the tumor cells that might be there
but they're not coming back very fast
because you've got the choke hold on the
glute on the glucose so they're there
but they're growing extremely slowly and
then once our immune system comes back
recovers itself from the small dose of
glutamine inhibitor uh then we hit them
again with another small dose of
glutamine inhibitor and we slowly
degrade the tumor while the rest of the
cells in the body are uh generating an
excessive efficiency in in health so
we're we're the rest of the cells in the
body are getting super healthy while
you're degrading slowly degrading the
tumor cells that are that are absolutely
dependent on a fermentation metabolism
it's an elegant beautiful system and
when it's done right it you can't
believe how well it works problem is
Sanjay nobody is doing that yeah I mean
I think that the first time I heard
about it on a clinical setting was uh Dr
Siddhartha Mukherjee you know I think
he's got a a new project he's working on
for pancreatic cancer I think uh more
particularly for that you know the
glutamine metabolic you know starvation
uh process but gosh that is that is
really like almost like getting
Goosebumps as a traditional obviously
medical oncologist you know it it makes
sense on a cellular level and I'm just
like part of me just like wants to
believe well if it's really fast
replicating like shouldn't we sprinkle a
little you know cytotoxic chemotherapy
just to accelerate the replication
process well you know you can do that
our colleagues in in in Turkey do that
Istanbul they use the lowest possible
doses of chemo that's allowable by the
profession right so you're not so you're
not out of compliance
and once the body is in nutritional
ketosis these chemo drugs uh also you
can use my very minimal dosages and it
just Slaughters these tumor cells and
you've reduced the level of toxicity my
view is uh I I well I'm not against that
because I've seen spectacular recoveries
of some people uh doing this kind of a
strategy but you know why would we ever
want to put any level of toxic material
into our body when we really don't have
to yeah so um I'm not opposed to people
who say let me use the lowest doses of
chemo uh once I get my patient into a
nutritional state of ketosis because the
toxicity levels are significantly
reduced and the therapeutic benefits are
massively high so this is why
um when we when we used our our
glutamine inhibitor 60 oxymor leucine
which was considered too toxic when it
was used by itself without targeting
glucose oh you know it's toxic but it's
never been as toxic as cisplatin
carboplatin lumistine and all these
horrible drugs but once you put the
patient in ketosis you can use very
small tiny doses of this stuff but it's
just like a whack man you just swack
those tumor cells because you they're so
vulnerable now they're just like on the
precip of survival and you hit them with
another little bit of it don't boom
they're brittle yeah so wow yeah they're
very susceptible but you got to put the
body in the right State before you can
use this kind of stuff you just can't go
into like a bull in a china shop you
really need to know the strategy of what
we're talking about so it's a it's a
graded process why we develop the Press
pulse therapeutic strategy for managing
cancer it's a it's a process and you
have to know how to how to use the the
the tool the tools that you have are
diet and drugs used in the appropriate
way so you can't use glutamine inhibitor
by itself you can't use glucose
inhibitor by itself you can't use the
diet by itself most of the time you have
to put the package together and know how
all the components fit together so so
you have powerful Synergy without toxic
and in what sequence and that's you know
I think we the doctor said
dosage timing and schedule this is where
we are right now we're perfecting dosage
timing and scheduling in our
pre-clinical systems and then we
translate it directly into the patients
with my colleagues who have uh clinics
that can do all this that's amazing so
it's a work in progress we have a very a
very singular goal how long can we keep
uh stage four cancer patients regardless
of what where what are tissue of origin
how long can we keep them alive with a
high quality of life
um you know if they die at 98 years old
when they had cancer at 38 years old
they were obviously cured with no
recurrence right but you can't know that
I mean when you say oh you can cure I
don't know if I can cure can all I know
is we all I know is if you can live far
longer than you were expected to live
with a higher quality of life that's
good in itself and if you live to be 90
because you manage this when you were 30
then then you can consider yourself very
fortunate so um but the goal is you know
how do we keep cancer paid oh these guys
oh I had stage four lung brain colon and
they're all out many of them are out
there doing well are they cured I have
no idea but they're still alive longer
than they would have been predicted to
be that is that is something else so I'm
sure a lot of people are thinking this
and and myself included is it
conceivably correct if somebody said if
they are constantly in a state of
ketosis
the likelihood of having a neoplastic or
cancerous population of cells uh spawn
in a constantly ketosis state is low yes
absolutely and how do we know that
we know that from historical records and
Aboriginal peoples and we know that from
our closest relative the chimpanzee
which are genetic he's The Chimps are 98
similar to us in Gene and protein
sequences and the Aboriginal uh tribes
that existed uh have been examined at
length the Inuits from the Alaska and
Canada regions the African tribes the
rainforest people the uh Australian
Aborigines these folks never had cancer
uh and they were always in a semi-state
of ketosis because their natural diets
are very low in carbohydrates so when
you're very low in carbohydrates and you
have a significant amount of exercise
you're always in a low state of ketosis
um you might have two you might have 0.5
millimolar ketones circulating your
blood glucoses are low and it's very
hard to generate a cancer if you if you
have a very healthy mitochondria the
only way you can get cancer is damage to
the oxidative phosphorylation in the
mitochondria so whether that comes from
drugs diets or whatever
um if you're in a state of ketosis
you're enhancing the health and vitality
of your mitochondria so makes it very
rare that's why Albert Schweitzer the
great humanitarian physician looked at
40 000 people in the African he never
saw a cancer in any of these patients so
he said wait no what's going on why
these Africans don't get cancer why the
Inuits never now the problem is the
Inuits are loaded with cancer type 2
diabetes cardio cardiovascular disease
as soon as the Western diet comes in
highly processed carbohydrate Foods put
your in a state of inflammation
inflammation damages respiration so
chronic inflammation can damage
respiration a population of cells in
some tissue eliciting cancer we have an
obesity epidemic in fact obesity is now
replacing smoking is the number a number
one risk factor for cancer right so so
what's going on with all that diet
lifestyle it's all it's a diet lifestyle
so uh you know you're not exercising
you're eating horrible Foods put
yourself in obese state inflammation and
that and that puts you at risk for all
kinds of different cancers and you're
saying the inflammation when I always
said it kind of you know basically
invites uh chances of error and
inflammation obviously decreases your
good immune cells to be able to clear an
area you're saying in addition to that
if not you know almost most importantly
it's that that inflammation allows an
environment for the mitochondrial injury
or dysfunction to occur yeah and then
what happened then what happens so you
put that's a chronic it's chronic it
doesn't happen overnight obviously it
takes it takes sometimes years for that
constant inflammatory insult whether
it's intermittent hypoxia chronic
inflammation all these and then you
combine that with some low dose of of
carcinogens that might be in your body
and you put all that together and then
gradually oxidative phosphorylation is
replaced by fermentation uh during that
process and when the oxfos becomes
dysfunctional it throws out reactive
oxygen species Ro OS
Ross are carcinogenic and mutagenic so
the mutations that you see in the
nucleus all those somatic mutations are
all Downstream effects of the Ross
produced by the damaged chronically
injured mitochondria so the cancer feel
for the most part are chasing the tail
they're chasing effects they're not
focusing on the real issue so you're
looking at how many different kinds of
somatic mutations people have in their
different cancers which is largely
irrelevant all that stuff is largely
irrelevant the National Cancer Institute
says cancer is a genetic disease and
nothing could be further from the truth
I mean it's not a genetic it's a
metabolic disease so why is everybody
focusing on all these crazy mutations
when they're all Downstream effects you
don't get the mutations until the
mitochondria becomes dysfunctional so
you put carcinogen you can see the
mitochondria become damaged they
bioluminesce actually and you can see
them thrown out rust already so it's a
staged chronic process it's very hard
for the human body to get cancer you
can't believe how tough it is to get we
evolve to be completely resistant to
cancer so in order for us to get cancer
you have to have a long-term self-abuse
of your body by exposure to all these
kinds of things because the Aboriginal
tribes and the chimpanzees tell us how
hard it is to get cancer you know you
know it's just yeah it's hard we're just
so deviated from hard stuff you know
it's just like wow it's so interesting
like hearing you say that is interesting
in the sense that I always say when
people ask you know frequently what can
I do to reduce my chance of cancer and
what causes cancer and I basically spit
a rally off like you know a line of
things and I'm like basically the same
stuff that they recommend to do for
cardiovascular health and to like you
know not do for cardiovascular health
they pretty much like overlap entirely
so am I hearing that possibly because of
what's called you know when we say
vasculopathy or basically like you know
inflamed arterial disease if you smoke
if you have diabetes like oscillation
all the stuff that makes maybe impaired
vascular flow like is is is that in some
way a super imposition of of why people
get cancers well because the delivery of
like you know like you know oxygen and
then the increase of Ros
are the things that are propagating or
inviting cancers right does that is that
a fair statement that's crazy it's a
very first and so that is why there's
such an overlap but you know is because
of the mitochondrial injury that occurs
due to impaired you know blood flow
because of again diabetes smoking lack
of cardiovascular health so what um when
you said you know processed foods
obviously I spent that off on the list
as well as one of the reasons I can
cause cancer but say somebody was keto
but ate processed foods
like what is it about the process part
itself that invites the mitochondrial
injury which you're saying is the like
you're saying it is an absolute
necessity correct to return into a
neoplastic cancerous malignant cell like
you have to have that is like the
limiting reagent okay so that's that's
origin that's the origin of cancer right
and so it's damaged a chronic chronic
damage to oxidative phosphorylation is
the origin of cancer which Can Happen by
any number of provocative agents when
you say highly processed what is highly
processed so the issue of course is that
these are foods that are high in glucose
high in sugar and they have no
nutritional value they're with minimal
nutritional value but high in sugar now
don't forget we evolved uh as a star of
species I mean our whole existence on
the planet has been trying to survive
famine trying to uh we move around we we
had to bring tools with us to to to get
the food that that we needed our our
physiology and our genome is ultimately
driven to store energy so uh because
we're always starving now we put
ourselves within the last
um you know 50 7 500 years
into a a state of massive amounts of
carbohydrates that have no nutritional
value
and that puts that again causes your
inflammation your obesity your type 2
diabetes your cardiovascular disease so
you're absolutely right Sanjay this is
all part of a Continuum uh and when we
in our metabolic approach to cancer
management and the folks that are
following our our instructions many of
these folks come in with cardiovascular
disease type 2 diabetes hypertension and
all these other kinds of things and by
the way that all goes away along with
their cancer so
um you know you're talking about a very
dangerous situation here I mean you're
talking and and a point in fact was the
recent paper that came out on the
Mediterranean diet reducing cancer
dementia and cardiovascular disease and
it's not the Mediterranean diet it's the
absence of Highly processed carbohydrate
foods which are not part of them
Mediterranean diet right and all of
those not complicated not complicated
it's not the olive oils and all that
stuff as much no yeah you know it's the
absence of the highly processed
carbohydrates you want to neutralize a
Mediterranean diet go out and eat a big
Subway sandwich or eat a couple of
Dunkin Donuts and and you can neutralize
all all the therapeutic benefits of the
Mediterranean diet real quick that's too
funny and it's so true because I mean
again it's just why is is it a
coincidence that it's always the stuff
that helps you know reduce chances of
heart attacks and strokes and they have
good cardiovascular health oh and also
they have like less cancer like like I
love that we're actually really kind of
somewhat pegging bro it's not just a
coincidence like like there's a reason
those things almost always you know
align or superimpose you know I tell you
nobody really cares I mean unless it's
really pointed out like I just did and I
I tell you why nobody cares because we
have an obesity epidemic If people
really cared about preventing cancer we
would not have an obesity epidemic yeah
yeah that's Hardy I I think what I think
is just
those things are so distant like the the
concerns which is which hopefully things
like this and hearing this I mean I'm
more motivated right now to be healthier
and eat less processed foods you know
than I've been probably in a long time
like just hearing all this because now
when you understand and hear it you're
just like I feel like again that's why
that's why we're doing this is that it
makes you now empowered instead of
hearing like oh your risk will be higher
it's like this is what's happening this
is where you have the you know potential
for mitochondrial damage this is why
this is your arteries getting all like
clogged up from X Y and Z and then all
these sugars or whatever now it's like
now I I'm doubting my lunch now yeah
yeah well you know but the other the
problem is of course we have we have
fast food stores on almost every corner
in every place in the United States it's
so convenient and and not only that
we're saying wow geez you know do you
ever eat this stuff do you ever eat a
Subway sandwich it's absolutely
delicious yeah you have McDonald's
hamburgers all right this stuff is like
so good a Taco Bell are you kidding me
you know uh Papa John's Pizza I mean
these things are are really really tasty
I mean they've been designed to make you
want to eat this stuff they should put a
skull and crossbones and a lot of that
stuff just to let you know every now and
then you shouldn't just like uh if you
do it all the time I'm not saying we
should Purge our society of this stuff
because I enjoy it myself too
occasionally but uh the problem is I
think so many folks in our society are
just like they don't know that if you do
that if you're not if you're eating
poorly processed and it's not only that
it's our lifestyle uh we're not as
active as we were those Aboriginal
tribes that I spoke about those guys are
out working in the fields they're doing
stuff all the time they're not sitting
in traffic listening to books on tape or
sitting in front of a computer you know
chowing down a big blueberry muffin you
know it's like uh or it's a combination
of the foods that we eat the lack of
exercise the mental and emotional stress
that we have in this Society all of
these things impact together to damage
the mitochondria in some population of
cells in some tissue putting you at risk
for either diabetes cancer dementia
let's go on the dementia thing it's all
it's all part of the same process yeah
and we're paying the price we're paying
the price for tasty Foods convenient and
convenient yeah and that people need to
know I mean it's like it's it's almost
like it's not our fault because we were
made to like have like to have a pension
for those things because we needed to
know when we were you know absent
brained and can stumbled across some
whatever on the on the field like we
needed to know that this was a high
calorie thing so that we wanted more of
it so it's like a a bottleneck effect
over Evolution that's now we've you know
that's why they say with intelligence
and greatness comes demise potentially
or concern for such we're still stuck
with the things that we needed when we
were very ambulatory and desperate but
the availability is event abundant I
like what you said about
um tying in really the concept of like
having to move around and be like more
physically active it's not so much that
we're saying like Oh Be Active to lose
weight we're saying that it's that
activity that really you know Burns
things and burns fuels and makes you I
love that angle on explanation on saying
like don't just do it to lose weight or
be healthy it's it's the actual process
and one thing that I remember reading
when I I used to you know be kind of a
work a junkie kind of person was that
the best kind of cardiovascular health
you could have
um and decrease your chance of heart
attack and stroke is even less than 60
to 80 minutes of cardio in a day is
doing 10 minutes every hour or every
other hour of getting your heart rate up
and that goes into that concept of
constant like you know burning it up and
making you have to break into some of
these like you know chains and stuff to
that that is the thing that that
protects your body you know as ideally
as regularly as possible
absolutely you're Health you're making
your mitochondria healthy you're giving
them the oxygen they need you're
increasing the blood flow you're you're
just generally making yourself healthier
I wouldn't yeah I agree with you 100 I
don't think it's just to lose weight I
think it's it's just to keep healthy
yeah
um you know walking uh swimming whatever
you're capable of doing uh make your
body button make energy like like at A
Moment Like make it Dynamic make it you
know we are yeah we are very uh mobile
species
um you know we we cover great distances
looking for food you know it's you know
in a Paleolithic period of our existence
before the cultivation of grains and the
development of civilizations I mean
think about how hard it was to get
something to eat I mean you had to track
down some animal uh that was oftentimes
bigger than you with in team effort and
and drag its ass back and chop it up and
eat it you know and there's a lot of
energy that goes into this and then the
reward
yeah and then you're gonna gather what a
few ripe berries when they're in season
then you're going to Gorge yourself on
those things you know and uh but that
was ours and we survived we actually
survived in these products because we
learned how to use certain tools we
learned how to kill animals in a better
way now we can Farm them you know they
put them out on a pasture and stuff like
this I mean but but uh we survived
because we have
um uh Rick Potts of the pay of uh the
Smithsonian uh uh put it pretty pretty
clearly you know we we have this
capability of uh adjusting to the
environment better than most other
animal species have and our genome and
our physiology is all geared into
survival under extreme conditions and
now we put ourselves in a new
environment uh completely different from
the environment we evolved in and we
have all of these chronic different
kinds of chronic diseases cancer
included so it's not that mysterious
when you put everything into the concept
of biological evolution
and that becomes very clear what the
situation is so rather and then we spend
billions of dollars trying to put a
Band-Aid on type 2 diabetes try to put a
Band-Aid on cardiovascular disease and
all and cancer and all these kinds of
things uh when we just have to keep our
mitochondria healthy and we won't have
to deal with these issues in the first
place yeah I mean that was very
beautifully sad it's it it makes sense
on just a macroscopic logic level the
more you like get distant from the very
cellular and behavioral you know
adaptations we've made to exist as a
human race over hundreds and thousands
of years what the things we had to get
selected for the things that died off if
they couldn't store their fats well
enough or didn't have the taste for fats
and said I don't like fats well you're
dead because that's yeah that's the
thing that's going to make you like the
most likely to live so you know the fact
that we had all of this it's almost
irreverent and then to say yeah let's go
ahead and now live a life that is very
like you know divergent or like distant
from exactly what this very I mean
that's the sharpest blade that you've
sharpened yeah no you're absolutely
right and now you don't even you can
just draw you don't even have to unask
the car you can just drive up and they
hand you the food right through the
window you don't even have to get out of
the car right I mean rather than walking
in to get a donut or something oh no I
gotta drive around and wait in this car
line and then some guy a hand comes out
of the window and puts a load of food
into your lap Thomas I want it in my
mouth I don't want to take the wrapper
off take it off and put it in my mouth
then they wonder why we have obesity and
cancer I mean what the hell's going on
here oh but again I mean one you know
the the the flip side the defender could
say it's like we're the tragic hero or
the anti-hero because it's like we're
also at the mercy of our own adaptations
I know you're kind of like yeah yeah
that's called being an adult or being
mature and not being a mammal but you
know it's you know having to fight the
very thing that we are hardwired over
time so okay yes I have one question
though that I had uh heard when it
relates to ketosis and it blew my mind
and talking about shortcuts right in
society and as we are especially in this
country I hear that there are ways that
you could consume things and temporarily
so it won't give you a sustained ketosis
but like a maybe a four to six hour
ketosis or is there such a product that
if I took you know q6 hours that I could
have a ketosis without having to do The
Upfront leg work because like I said I
want the burger in my mouth like
basically is there a way I can achieve
that without the two and a half days of
supposedly a headache before I get
ketosis well listen no no no the the
issue of course is yeah we were taught
we in the I worked in the epilepsy field
for years
and everybody's talking about uh can we
get a ketogenic diet or ketosis and a
pill yeah uh yeah yeah I mean that was
the big thing right so you really want
that okay you take one pill for
breakfast wash it down with water one
pill for lunch wash it down with water
you do that for three days yeah
yeah that's hilarious
yeah that is the Holy Grail of my
marketing scheme because it's true and
you're not doing anything
yeah but but but
more seriously
um when you say uh can I get into it's
the sustained uh condition of being in
some level of of moderate ketosis that's
really the most healthy for your body
and you know we're learning now from a
lot of folks that are measuring there I
we developed here at Boston College the
glucose Ketone index which was for the
cancer patient to know when their blood
sugar was low and their blood ketones
were elevated and they then become at
the perfect condition for low-dose chemo
or targeting glucose and glutamine
um and um we we built that but now we
realize that you know you can stay into
those those zones uh with a carnivore
consuming of carnivore with
Mediterranean diets with vegetables
vegetarian diets as long as you don't
eat too much and the foods that you eat
are very low glycemic you can get into
these states of ketosis with not too
much difficulty the only difficulty
would be the Restriction of Highly
processed carbohydrates and for some
people who happen to be addicted to
those kinds of things because glucose is
a powerful addictive fuel It's Like
Cocaine it's like opium it's like
nicotine it can be very powerful on the
brain but your we evolved not to have
very much glucose in our diets so we
will fall back our bodies will recognize
that we are back in a semi-paleolithic
state but we can we can get into these
zones of ketosis so we now my colleague
Dominic D'Agostino from University of
South Florida and he's made Ketone Ester
Solutions where you can take that and
Jack just like you said right but it
goes away it goes away it's you really
want to get it to be sustained and
sustained ketosis with low glucose is a
very very therapeutic and people can do
this I mean you know at first we were
saying oh you got to do water only
fasting well that doesn't go over real
well nobody after a couple of days
you're out of that hell I'm I'm gone
from this but um you know with a
carnivore diet with certain kinds of low
glycemic vegetables and things you you
can get into these and you use the gki
to know whether you're not whether
you're there or not so we we did it for
the cancer patients but now we see all
these all these young healthy folks not
cancerous not cardiovas none of these
chronic diseases they're all doing the
gki because they know that if they're in
this Zone their their mitochondria are
going to be at the healthiest state so
they're using it as a as a as a
prevention as a health benefit for their
body I want to use it but yeah gki
glucose Ketone you get it from the keto
Mojo and you know and when we made it we
had to ask people because you get blood
sugar in in milligram uh per decaliter
that's a liter and you get ketones and
millimolin so you have to divide the
glucose by 18 and and then divide that
number by the millimolar of Ketone wow
so the keto Mojo guys made a little chip
in the meter so all you have to do is
get the the blood value and the and the
uh the and you do the the the glucose
strip and then the Ketone strip and you
push the button on the meter it gives
you the voila you get the gki right
there you don't even have to do the
arithmetic anymore Dr Seafood you were
amazing I would love to have you back
this has been so edifying and now I
almost have anxiety that I've been
slacking for 35 years so and I you
definitely have catalyzed my thinking on
this especially with young kids and uh
and I'm excited to do some digging but
we appreciate you and uh and yeah so
where can people find you if they want
to read more on your material we've
published our papers in uh peer-reviewed
journals uh curus is one of them you
know for our case reports uh but anybody
can look my name up and and see uh the
public locations that we've written on
on PubMed publication of excellent
Library of Medicine all right thank you
so much
[Music]
foreign